VALIDATION RUN 2 — and-split rule — summary for handoff
Source: tmp-validation-run2-results.txt, committed to main at https://github.com/Mellieradpants/wa-civic-dashboard/blob/main/tmp-validation-run2-results.txt

=== SUMMARY ===
Summary:
  total distinct sentences: 595
  total splits performed: 181
  total fail-safe suppressions (FAILSAFE_EMPTY_SIDE): 0
  total FIRST_SIDE_NOT_A_DUTY suppressions: 39
  total near-miss instances found (separate, unsplit): 366

=== ROUND-OVER-ROUND COMPARISON ===
Round-over-round comparison:
  round 1 total splits: 220
  round 2 total splits: 181
  sentences compared against round 1 baseline: 589
  sentences whose split outcome changed: 39


=== FORCE-WORD PAIR BREAKDOWN ===
Force-word pair breakdown (first duty force -> second duty force), per split event:
  shall -> shall: 60
  must -> must: 31
  shall -> may: 23
  may -> may: 19
  shall -> shall_not: 9
  must -> may: 8
  may -> shall: 5
  may -> must: 4
  must -> shall: 4
  must -> may_not: 3
  must -> must_not: 3
  may_not -> may_not: 3
  shall -> may_not: 3
  shall -> must: 2
  should -> must: 1
  must_not -> must_not: 1
  shall_not -> shall_not: 1
  may_not -> shall: 1

=== CONTROL GROUP: real splits whose own trigger carries a control tag (32) ===
--- CONTROL-SPLIT 1 — bill 1234, section section_1, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (d) One member must be either a licensed advanced social worker or a licensed independent clinical social worker; and (e) Three members must be consumers and represent the public at large and may not be licensed mental health care providers.
  trigger: "and may not" force=may_not
  side1: (d) One member must be either a licensed advanced social worker or a licensed independent clinical social worker; and (e) Three members must be consumers and represent the public at large
  side2: be licensed mental health care providers.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 2 — bill 1234, section section_1, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (b) Each member must not hold a governing office or board position in a professional association for mental health, social work, or marriage and family therapy and must not be employed by the state of Washington.
  trigger: "and must not" force=must_not
  side1: (b) Each member must not hold a governing office or board position in a professional association for mental health, social work, or marriage and family therapy
  side2: be employed by the state of Washington.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 3 — bill 1345, section section_1, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (b) Owners who do not seek voluntary compliance and are found to have constructed or placed a detached accessory dwelling unit without all required permits must be subject to a civil infraction of at least $1,000 and must be required to remove the detached accessory dwelling unit or ensure that it meets all existing development regulations, if applicable.
  trigger: "and must" force=must
  side1: (b) Owners who do not seek voluntary compliance and are found to have constructed or placed a detached accessory dwelling unit without all required permits must be subject to a civil infraction of at least $1,000
  side2: be required to remove the detached accessory dwelling unit or ensure that it meets all existing development regulations, if applicable.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 4 — bill 1400, section section_8, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: The application shall be signed by the president or some managing officer of the railroad corporation and shall be accompanied by an affidavit stating that the officer is acquainted with the person whose commission is sought, that the officer believes the person to be of good moral character, and that the person is of such character and experience that he or she can be safely entrusted with the powers of a police officer.
  trigger: "and shall" force=shall
  side1: The application shall be signed by the president or some managing officer of the railroad corporation
  side2: be accompanied by an affidavit stating that the officer is acquainted with the person whose commission is sought, that the officer believes the person to be of good moral character, and that the person is of such character and experience that he or she can be safely entrusted with the powers of a police officer.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 5 — bill 1423, section section_3, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (12) If a county or city has established an automated traffic safety camera program as authorized under this section, the compensation paid to the manufacturer or vendor of the equipment used must be based only upon the value of the equipment and services provided or rendered in support of the system and may not be based upon a portion of the fine or civil penalty imposed or the revenue generated by the equipment.
  trigger: "and may not" force=may_not
  side1: (12) If a county or city has established an automated traffic safety camera program as authorized under this section, the compensation paid to the manufacturer or vendor of the equipment used must be based only upon the value of the equipment and services provided or rendered in support of the system
  side2: be based upon a portion of the fine or civil penalty imposed or the revenue generated by the equipment.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 6 — bill 1468, section section_8, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] [appeared in 2 places: bill 1468 section_8, bill 5441 section_8] ---
sentence: RCW 43.79A.040 and 2024 c 327 s 16 and 2024 c 168 s 10 are each reenacted and amended to read as follows: (1) Money in the treasurer's trust fund may be deposited, invested, and reinvested by the state treasurer in accordance with RCW 43.84.080 in the same manner and to the same extent as if the money were in the state treasury, and may be commingled with moneys in the state treasury for cash management and cash balance purposes.
  trigger: ", and may" force=may
  side1: RCW 43.79A.040 and 2024 c 327 s 16 and 2024 c 168 s 10 are each reenacted and amended to read as follows: (1) Money in the treasurer's trust fund may be deposited, invested, and reinvested by the state treasurer in accordance with RCW 43.84.080 in the same manner and to the same extent as if the money were in the state treasury
  side2: be commingled with moneys in the state treasury for cash management and cash balance purposes.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 7 — bill 1468, section section_9, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] [appeared in 2 places: bill 1468 section_9, bill 5441 section_9] ---
sentence: RCW 43.79A.040 and 2024 c 327 s 17 and 2024 c 168 s 11 are each reenacted and amended to read as follows: (1) Money in the treasurer's trust fund may be deposited, invested, and reinvested by the state treasurer in accordance with RCW 43.84.080 in the same manner and to the same extent as if the money were in the state treasury, and may be commingled with moneys in the state treasury for cash management and cash balance purposes.
  trigger: ", and may" force=may
  side1: RCW 43.79A.040 and 2024 c 327 s 17 and 2024 c 168 s 11 are each reenacted and amended to read as follows: (1) Money in the treasurer's trust fund may be deposited, invested, and reinvested by the state treasurer in accordance with RCW 43.84.080 in the same manner and to the same extent as if the money were in the state treasury
  side2: be commingled with moneys in the state treasury for cash management and cash balance purposes.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 8 — bill 1534, section section_15, control=[AS_MAY_BE,AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (3) Any manufacturer whose vapor products containing nicotine are sold in this state, who has not appointed and engaged an agent as required in this section, must be deemed to have appointed the secretary of state as the agent and may be proceeded against in courts of this state by service of process upon the secretary of state.
  trigger: "and may" force=may
  side1: (3) Any manufacturer whose vapor products containing nicotine are sold in this state, who has not appointed and engaged an agent as required in this section, must be deemed to have appointed the secretary of state as the agent
  side2: be proceeded against in courts of this state by service of process upon the secretary of state.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 9 — bill 1545, section section_4, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: All data must be reported in the aggregate form and shall be posted on the department's website and submitted to the governor and the relevant committees of the legislature.
  trigger: "and shall" force=shall
  side1: All data must be reported in the aggregate form
  side2: be posted on the department's website and submitted to the governor and the relevant committees of the legislature.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 10 — bill 1635, section section_2, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: RCW 24.06.130 and 2011 c 336 s 665 are each amended to read as follows: (1) The number of directors of a corporation shall be not less than three and shall be fixed by the bylaws: PROVIDED, That the number of the first board of directors shall be fixed by the articles of incorporation.
  trigger: "and shall" force=shall
  side1: RCW 24.06.130 and 2011 c 336 s 665 are each amended to read as follows: (1) The number of directors of a corporation shall be not less than three
  side2: be fixed by the bylaws: PROVIDED, That the number of the first board of directors shall be fixed by the articles of incorporation.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 11 — bill 1679, section section_2, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (f) Nonemitting electric generation used to meet the standard under (a) of this subsection must be generated during the compliance period and must be verified by documentation that the electric utility owns the nonpower attributes of the electricity generated by the nonemitting electric generation resource.
  trigger: "and must" force=must
  side1: (f) Nonemitting electric generation used to meet the standard under (a) of this subsection must be generated during the compliance period
  side2: be verified by documentation that the electric utility owns the nonpower attributes of the electricity generated by the nonemitting electric generation resource.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 12 — bill 1818, section section_8, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: RCW 58.17.065 and 1974 ex.s. c 134 s 12 are each amended to read as follows: Each short plat and short subdivision granted by a city, town, or county pursuant to local regulations after July 1, 1974, and for which a complete application was submitted for approval on or before June 30, 2026, shall be recorded with the county auditor of the county or counties in which the land is located and shall not be deemed "approved" unless the documents are recorded .
  trigger: "and shall not" force=shall_not
  side1: RCW 58.17.065 and 1974 ex.s. c 134 s 12 are each amended to read as follows: Each short plat and short subdivision granted by a city, town, or county pursuant to local regulations after July 1, 1974, and for which a complete application was submitted for approval on or before June 30, 2026, shall be recorded with the county auditor of the county or counties in which the land is located
  side2: be deemed "approved" unless the documents are recorded .

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 13 — bill 1818, section section_9, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: The final plat must be processed administratively pursuant to RCW 58.17.140 (4) and may not be required to provide notice pursuant to RCW 36.70B.110 and may not require a public hearing.
  trigger: "and may not" force=may_not
  side1: The final plat must be processed administratively pursuant to RCW 58.17.140 (4)
  side2: be required to provide notice pursuant to RCW 36.70B.110

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 14 — bill 1946, section section_1, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] [appeared in 4 places: bill 1946 section_1, bill 1946 section_2, bill 1946 section_3, bill 1946 section_4] ---
sentence: (a) The remaining board members must be persons who are not elected officials and must be selected from the following categories consistent with the requirements of this section and the rules adopted by the state board of health under RCW 43.20.300 : (i) Public health, health care facilities, and providers.
  trigger: "and must" force=must
  side1: (a) The remaining board members must be persons who are not elected officials
  side2: be selected from the following categories consistent with the requirements of this section and the rules adopted by the state board of health under RCW 43.20.300 : (i) Public health, health care facilities, and providers.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 15 — bill 1992, section section_206, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: RCW 46.61.140 and 2020 c 199 s 2 are each amended to read as follows: Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply: (1) A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
  trigger: "and shall not" force=shall_not
  side1: RCW 46.61.140 and 2020 c 199 s 2 are each amended to read as follows: Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply: (1) A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane
  side2: be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 16 — bill 2081, section section_109, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: Requests under this subsection (2)(d)(i) must be in writing and may be made electronically.
  trigger: "and may" force=may
  side1: Requests under this subsection (2)(d)(i) must be in writing
  side2: be made electronically.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 17 — bill 2189, section section_2, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: If the department determines that an employer has engaged in a pattern of harassment or coercion, the employer may be subject to penalty or corrective action, and may be removed from the retrospective rating program or be decertified from self-insurance under RCW 51.14.030 .
  trigger: ", and may" force=may
  side1: If the department determines that an employer has engaged in a pattern of harassment or coercion, the employer may be subject to penalty or corrective action
  side2: be removed from the retrospective rating program or be decertified from self-insurance under RCW 51.14.030 .

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 18 — bill 5085, section section_506, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: Except as provided in subsections (6), (7), and (9) of this section, the supplemental contribution rates required by this section shall be calculated by the state actuary and shall be charged regardless of language to the contrary contained in the statute which authorizes additional benefits.
  trigger: "and shall" force=shall
  side1: Except as provided in subsections (6), (7), and (9) of this section, the supplemental contribution rates required by this section shall be calculated by the state actuary
  side2: be charged regardless of language to the contrary contained in the statute which authorizes additional benefits.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 19 — bill 5085, section section_606, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (b) Once an eligible person elects to participate in the salary reduction plan and determines the amount his or her gross salary shall be reduced and the benefit plan for which the funds are to be used during the plan year, the agreement shall be irrevocable and may not be amended during the plan year except as provided in (c) of this subsection.
  trigger: "and may not" force=may_not
  side1: (b) Once an eligible person elects to participate in the salary reduction plan and determines the amount his or her gross salary shall be reduced and the benefit plan for which the funds are to be used during the plan year, the agreement shall be irrevocable
  side2: be amended during the plan year except as provided in (c) of this subsection.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 20 — bill 5140, section section_8, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: A licensee renewing after the expiration date of the license under this subsection shall pay only the renewal fee specified in subsection (6) of this section and shall not be required to pay a late renewal penalty in addition to the renewal fee.
  trigger: "and shall not" force=shall_not
  side1: A licensee renewing after the expiration date of the license under this subsection shall pay only the renewal fee specified in subsection (6) of this section
  side2: be required to pay a late renewal penalty in addition to the renewal fee.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 21 — bill 5218, section section_5, control=[AS_MAY_BE] ---
sentence: RCW 46.20.329 and 1982 c 189 s 4 are each amended to read as follows: Upon receiving a request for a formal hearing as provided in RCW 46.20.328 , the department shall fix a time and place for hearing , including a remote hearing, as early as may be arranged , and shall give 10 days' notice of the hearing to the applicant or licensee.
  trigger: ", and shall" force=shall
  side1: RCW 46.20.329 and 1982 c 189 s 4 are each amended to read as follows: Upon receiving a request for a formal hearing as provided in RCW 46.20.328 , the department shall fix a time and place for hearing , including a remote hearing, as early as may be arranged
  side2: give 10 days' notice of the hearing to the applicant or licensee.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 22 — bill 5262, section section_7, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (4) Appoints the insurance commissioner as its true and lawful attorney upon whom may be served lawful process in any action, suit, or proceeding in any court, which appointment is irrevocable, binds the insurer or institution or any successor in interest, remains in effect as long as there is in force in this state any contract made or issued by the insurer or institution, or any obligation arising therefrom, and must be processed in accordance with RCW 48.05.200 ;
  trigger: ", and must" force=must
  side1: (4) Appoints the insurance commissioner as its true and lawful attorney upon whom may be served lawful process in any action, suit, or proceeding in any court, which appointment is irrevocable, binds the insurer or institution or any successor in interest, remains in effect as long as there is in force in this state any contract made or issued by the insurer or institution, or any obligation arising therefrom
  side2: be processed in accordance with RCW 48.05.200 ;

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 23 — bill 5262, section section_10, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: The notice must be in writing and must be transmitted at the earliest of the next mailing to the policyholder, the yearly summary of benefits sent to the policyholder, or January 1 of the year following June 6, 1996.
  trigger: "and must" force=must
  side1: The notice must be in writing
  side2: be transmitted at the earliest of the next mailing to the policyholder, the yearly summary of benefits sent to the policyholder, or January 1 of the year following June 6, 1996.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 24 — bill 5296, section section_1, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: A disposition outside the standard range shall be determinate , subject to the review hearings in RCW 13.40.185 (3) when appropriate, and shall be comprised of confinement or community supervision, or a combination thereof.
  trigger: ", and shall" force=shall
  side1: A disposition outside the standard range shall be determinate , subject to the review hearings in RCW 13.40.185 (3) when appropriate
  side2: be comprised of confinement or community supervision, or a combination thereof.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 25 — bill 5352, section section_2, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (8)(a) Except as provided in (b) of this subsection, the minimum allocation for each school district shall include allocations per annual average full-time equivalent student for the following materials, supplies, and operating costs as provided in the 2023-24 school year, after which the allocations shall be adjusted annually for inflation as specified in the omnibus appropriations act: Per annual average full-time equivalent student in grades K-12 Technology. . . . $178.98 Utilities and insurance. . . . $430.26 Curriculum and textbooks. . . . $164.48 Other supplies . . . . $326.54 Library materials. . . .$22.65 Instructional professional development for certificated and classified staff. . . . $28.94 Facilities maintenance. . . . $206.22 Security and central office administration. . . . $146.37 (b) In addition to the amounts provided in (a) of this subsection, beginning in the 2023-24 school year, the omnibus appropriations act shall provide the following minimum allocation for each annual average full-time equivalent student in grades nine through 12 for the following materials, supplies, and operating costs, to be adjusted annually for inflation: Per annual average full-time equivalent student in grades 9-12 Technology. . . .$44.05 Curriculum and textbooks. . . .$48.06 Other supplies . . . . $94.07 Library materials. . . .$6.05 Instructional professional development for certificated and classified staff. . . .$8.01 (c) The increased allocation amount of $21 per annual average full-time equivalent student for materials, supplies, and operating costs provided under (a) of this subsection is intended to address growing costs in the enumerated categories and may not be expended for any other purpose.
  trigger: "and may not" force=may_not
  side1: (8)(a) Except as provided in (b) of this subsection, the minimum allocation for each school district shall include allocations per annual average full-time equivalent student for the following materials, supplies, and operating costs as provided in the 2023-24 school year, after which the allocations shall be adjusted annually for inflation as specified in the omnibus appropriations act: Per annual average full-time equivalent student in grades K-12 Technology. . . . $178.98 Utilities and insurance. . . . $430.26 Curriculum and textbooks. . . . $164.48 Other supplies . . . . $326.54 Library materials. . . .$22.65 Instructional professional development for certificated and classified staff. . . . $28.94 Facilities maintenance. . . . $206.22 Security and central office administration. . . . $146.37 (b) In addition to the amounts provided in (a) of this subsection, beginning in the 2023-24 school year, the omnibus appropriations act shall provide the following minimum allocation for each annual average full-time equivalent student in grades nine through 12 for the following materials, supplies, and operating costs, to be adjusted annually for inflation: Per annual average full-time equivalent student in grades 9-12 Technology. . . .$44.05 Curriculum and textbooks. . . .$48.06 Other supplies . . . . $94.07 Library materials. . . .$6.05 Instructional professional development for certificated and classified staff. . . .$8.01 (c) The increased allocation amount of $21 per annual average full-time equivalent student for materials, supplies, and operating costs provided under (a) of this subsection is intended to address growing costs in the enumerated categories
  side2: be expended for any other purpose.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 26 — bill 5352, section section_2, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: The definition of full-time equivalent student shall be determined by rules of the superintendent of public instruction and shall be included as part of the superintendent's biennial budget request.
  trigger: "and shall" force=shall
  side1: The definition of full-time equivalent student shall be determined by rules of the superintendent of public instruction
  side2: be included as part of the superintendent's biennial budget request.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 27 — bill 5374, section section_1, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: Public services and public facilities shall be limited to those necessary to serve the recreation or tourist use and shall be provided in a manner that does not permit low-density sprawl;
  trigger: "and shall" force=shall
  side1: Public services and public facilities shall be limited to those necessary to serve the recreation or tourist use
  side2: be provided in a manner that does not permit low-density sprawl;

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 28 — bill 5374, section section_1, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: Public services and public facilities shall be limited to those necessary to serve the isolated nonresidential use and shall be provided in a manner that does not permit low-density sprawl;
  trigger: "and shall" force=shall
  side1: Public services and public facilities shall be limited to those necessary to serve the isolated nonresidential use
  side2: be provided in a manner that does not permit low-density sprawl;

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 29 — bill 5640, section section_1, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (5) Applications for certification shall be upon forms prescribed by the council and shall be supported by such information and technical studies as the council may require.
  trigger: "and shall" force=shall
  side1: (5) Applications for certification shall be upon forms prescribed by the council
  side2: be supported by such information and technical studies as the council may require.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 30 — bill 5732, section section_5, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (7) Multicounty planning policies shall be adopted by two or more counties, each with a population of four hundred fifty thousand or more, with contiguous urban areas and may be adopted by other counties, according to the process established under this section or other processes agreed to among the counties and cities within the affected counties throughout the multicounty region.
  trigger: "and may" force=may
  side1: (7) Multicounty planning policies shall be adopted by two or more counties, each with a population of four hundred fifty thousand or more, with contiguous urban areas
  side2: be adopted by other counties, according to the process established under this section or other processes agreed to among the counties and cities within the affected counties throughout the multicounty region.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 31 — bill 5776, section section_3, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (2) The credit may be used against any tax due under this chapter, and may be carried over until used, except as provided in subsection (4) of this section.
  trigger: ", and may" force=may
  side1: (2) The credit may be used against any tax due under this chapter
  side2: be carried over until used, except as provided in subsection (4) of this section.

--- CONTROL-SPLIT 32 — bill 5798, section section_301, control=[AND_MAY_BE_PASSIVE] ---
sentence: (13) The direct cost of foreclosure and sale of real property, and the direct fees and costs of distraint and sale of personal property, for delinquent taxes, must, when collected, be credited to the operation and maintenance fund of the county treasurer prosecuting the foreclosure or distraint or sale; and must be used by the county treasurer as a revolving fund to defray the cost of further foreclosure, distraint, and sale because of delinquent taxes without regard to budget limitations and not subject to indirect costs of other charges.
  trigger: "; and must" force=must
  side1: (13) The direct cost of foreclosure and sale of real property, and the direct fees and costs of distraint and sale of personal property, for delinquent taxes, must, when collected, be credited to the operation and maintenance fund of the county treasurer prosecuting the foreclosure or distraint or sale
  side2: be used by the county treasurer as a revolving fund to defray the cost of further foreclosure, distraint, and sale because of delinquent taxes without regard to budget limitations and not subject to indirect costs of other charges.



=== FIRST_SIDE_NOT_A_DUTY suppressions (39) — check for over-blocking ===
--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 1 — bill 1000, section section_1 ---
sentence: A departure from the standards in RCW 9.94A.589 (1) and (2) governing whether sentences are to be served consecutively or concurrently is an exceptional sentence subject to the limitations in this section, and may be appealed by the offender or the state as set forth in RCW 9.94A.585 (2) through (6).
  trigger: ", and may" force=may
  side1 (no force-word found): A departure from the standards in RCW 9.94A.589 (1) and (2) governing whether sentences are to be served consecutively or concurrently is an exceptional sentence subject to the limitations in this section
  side2: be appealed by the offender or the state as set forth in RCW 9.94A.585 (2) through (6).

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 2 — bill 1100, section section_2 ---
sentence: The tax is in addition to other taxes authorized by law and must be collected from those persons who are taxable by the state under chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW upon the occurrence of any taxable event within the city or county.
  trigger: "and must" force=must
  side1 (no force-word found): The tax is in addition to other taxes authorized by law
  side2: be collected from those persons who are taxable by the state under chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW upon the occurrence of any taxable event within the city or county.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 3 — bill 1156, section section_1 ---
sentence: This subsection does not apply to higher education undergraduate and graduate student employees and shall be administered consistent with the requirements of the federal internal revenue code.
  trigger: "and shall" force=shall
  side1 (no force-word found): This subsection does not apply to higher education undergraduate and graduate student employees
  side2: be administered consistent with the requirements of the federal internal revenue code.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 4 — bill 1201, section section_1 ---
sentence: The legislature further finds that partnerships with nongovernmental organizations support emergency planning and preparedness and may be used to support identification and operation of coshelters.
  trigger: "and may" force=may
  side1 (no force-word found): The legislature further finds that partnerships with nongovernmental organizations support emergency planning and preparedness
  side2: be used to support identification and operation of coshelters.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 5 — bill 1323, section section_2 ---
sentence: (c) It is a class C felony if a person is a leader or organizer of the people engaging in obstructing highways and must pay a monetary penalty of at least $5,000, which may not be reduced to an amount less than $1,000.
  trigger: "and must" force=must
  side1 (no force-word found): (c) It is a class C felony if a person is a leader or organizer of the people engaging in obstructing highways
  side2: pay a monetary penalty of at least $5,000, which may not be reduced to an amount less than $1,000.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 6 — bill 1378, section section_7 [appeared in 2 places: bill 1378 section_7, bill 1378 section_8] ---
sentence: (6) The department is not authorized to, and may not, supervise any offender sentenced to a term of community custody or any probationer unless the offender or probationer is one for whom supervision is required under this section or RCW 9.94A.5011 .
  trigger: ", and may not" force=may_not
  side1 (no force-word found): (6) The department is not authorized to
  side2: , supervise any offender sentenced to a term of community custody or any probationer unless the offender or probationer is one for whom supervision is required under this section or RCW 9.94A.5011 .

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 7 — bill 1400, section section_1 ---
sentence: The event, "chief for a day," occurs on one day, annually or every other year and may occur on the grounds and in the facilities of the commission.
  trigger: "and may" force=may
  side1 (no force-word found): The event, "chief for a day," occurs on one day, annually or every other year
  side2: occur on the grounds and in the facilities of the commission.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 8 — bill 1400, section section_7 ---
sentence: RCW 81.60.010 and 2001 c 72 s 1 are each amended to read as follows: The criminal justice training commission shall have the power to and may in its discretion commission railroad police officers at the request of any railroad corporation and may revoke any commission at its pleasure.
  trigger: "and may" force=may
  side1 (no force-word found): in its discretion commission railroad police officers at the request of any railroad corporation
  side2: revoke any commission at its pleasure.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 9 — bill 1423, section section_3 ---
sentence: (11) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all photographs, microphotographs, electronic images, or audio recordings, or any other personally identifying data prepared under this section are for the exclusive use of authorized city or county employees, as specified in RCW 46.63.030 (1)(d), in the discharge of duties under this section and are not open to the public and may not be used in a court in a pending action or proceeding unless the action or proceeding relates to a violation under this section.
  trigger: "and may not" force=may_not
  side1 (no force-word found): (11) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all photographs, microphotographs, electronic images, or audio recordings, or any other personally identifying data prepared under this section are for the exclusive use of authorized city or county employees, as specified in RCW 46.63.030 (1)(d), in the discharge of duties under this section and are not open to the public
  side2: be used in a court in a pending action or proceeding unless the action or proceeding relates to a violation under this section.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 10 — bill 1468, section section_10 [appeared in 6 places: bill 1468 section_10, bill 1468 section_11, bill 5085 section_614, bill 5085 section_615, bill 5441 section_10, bill 5441 section_11] ---
sentence: Refunds of interest to the federal treasury required under the cash management improvement act fall under RCW 43.88.180 and shall not require appropriation.
  trigger: "and shall not" force=shall_not
  side1 (no force-word found): Refunds of interest to the federal treasury required under the cash management improvement act fall under RCW 43.88.180
  side2: require appropriation.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 11 — bill 1534, section section_11 ---
sentence: (5) After 30 days following removal from the directory, the vapor products containing nicotine of a manufacturer identified in the notice of removal and intended for retail sale in this state or to a consumer in this state are subject to seizure, in accordance with RCW 82.25.095 , from distributors and retailers, forfeiture from distributors and retailers, and destruction or disposal, and may not be purchased or sold for retail sale in this state or to a consumer in this state.
  trigger: ", and may not" force=may_not
  side1 (no force-word found): (5) After 30 days following removal from the directory, the vapor products containing nicotine of a manufacturer identified in the notice of removal and intended for retail sale in this state or to a consumer in this state are subject to seizure, in accordance with RCW 82.25.095 , from distributors and retailers, forfeiture from distributors and retailers, and destruction or disposal
  side2: be purchased or sold for retail sale in this state or to a consumer in this state.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 12 — bill 1534, section section_12 ---
sentence: (4) After 60 days following publication of the directory, vapor products containing nicotine not listed in the directory and intended for retail sale in this state or to a consumer in this state are subject to seizure, forfeiture, and destruction or disposal, and may not be purchased or sold for retail sale in this state or to a consumer in this state except as provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this section.
  trigger: ", and may not" force=may_not
  side1 (no force-word found): (4) After 60 days following publication of the directory, vapor products containing nicotine not listed in the directory and intended for retail sale in this state or to a consumer in this state are subject to seizure, forfeiture, and destruction or disposal
  side2: be purchased or sold for retail sale in this state or to a consumer in this state except as provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this section.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 13 — bill 1534, section section_13 ---
sentence: (4) Vapor products containing nicotine offered for sale in violation of sections 7 through 17 of this act are considered contraband and may be seized and disposed of or destroyed by an enforcement officer of the board.
  trigger: "and may" force=may
  side1 (no force-word found): (4) Vapor products containing nicotine offered for sale in violation of sections 7 through 17 of this act are considered contraband
  side2: be seized and disposed of or destroyed by an enforcement officer of the board.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 14 — bill 1623, section section_1 ---
sentence: Tips and service charges paid to an employee are in addition to, and may not count towards, the employee's hourly minimum wage.
  trigger: ", and may not" force=may_not
  side1 (no force-word found): Tips and service charges paid to an employee are in addition to
  side2: count towards, the employee's hourly minimum wage.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 15 — bill 1714, section section_10 ---
sentence: (2) All interest and earnings collected on program funds belong to the program and must be deposited to the program's credit in the proper program account.
  trigger: "and must" force=must
  side1 (no force-word found): (2) All interest and earnings collected on program funds belong to the program
  side2: be deposited to the program's credit in the proper program account.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 16 — bill 1818, section section_5 ---
sentence: (6) It is a violation of this chapter, and may be restrained by injunctive action and found illegal as provided in this chapter, to sell, transfer, or lease any lot or tract that is on a binding site plan that has not been approved and recorded or does not conform to the requirements of the binding site plan.
  trigger: ", and may" force=may
  side1 (no force-word found): (6) It is a violation of this chapter
  side2: be restrained by injunctive action and found illegal as provided in this chapter, to sell, transfer, or lease any lot or tract that is on a binding site plan that has not been approved and recorded or does not conform to the requirements of the binding site plan.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 17 — bill 1818, section section_9 ---
sentence: The final plat must be processed administratively pursuant to RCW 58.17.140 (4) and may not be required to provide notice pursuant to RCW 36.70B.110 and may not require a public hearing.
  trigger: "and may not" force=may_not
  side1 (no force-word found): be required to provide notice pursuant to RCW 36.70B.110
  side2: require a public hearing.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 18 — bill 1818, section section_27 ---
sentence: The city, town, or county shall give notice as provided in RCW 58.17.080 and shall conduct a public hearing on the application for a vacation if required by local ordinance and may approve or deny the application for vacation of the subdivision based on determining whether the public use and interest would be served by the vacation of the subdivision.
  trigger: "and may" force=may
  side1 (no force-word found): conduct a public hearing on the application for a vacation if required by local ordinance
  side2: approve or deny the application for vacation of the subdivision based on determining whether the public use and interest would be served by the vacation of the subdivision.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 19 — bill 1946, section section_1 [appeared in 3 places: bill 1946 section_1, bill 1946 section_2, bill 1946 section_4] ---
sentence: These individuals may not be elected officials and may not have any fiduciary obligation to a health facility or other health agency, and may not have a material financial interest in the rendering of health services; and (iii) Other community stakeholders.
  trigger: ", and may not" force=may_not
  side1 (no force-word found): have any fiduciary obligation to a health facility or other health agency
  side2: have a material financial interest in the rendering of health services; and (iii) Other community stakeholders.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 20 — bill 1946, section section_3 ---
sentence: These individuals may not be elected officials, and may not have any fiduciary obligation to a health facility or other health agency, and may not have a material financial interest in the rendering of health services; and (iii) Other community stakeholders.
  trigger: ", and may not" force=may_not
  side1 (no force-word found): have any fiduciary obligation to a health facility or other health agency
  side2: have a material financial interest in the rendering of health services; and (iii) Other community stakeholders.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 21 — bill 1981, section section_2 ---
sentence: (2) The tax rate is three percent of the selling price of the renewable energy facility and must be assessed on the seller.
  trigger: "and must" force=must
  side1 (no force-word found): (2) The tax rate is three percent of the selling price of the renewable energy facility
  side2: be assessed on the seller.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 22 — bill 2014, section section_1 [appeared in 2 places: bill 2014 section_1, bill 2014 section_2] ---
sentence: (10) "Crime-related prohibition" means an order of a court prohibiting conduct that directly relates to the circumstances of the crime for which the offender has been convicted, and shall not be construed to mean orders directing an offender affirmatively to participate in rehabilitative programs or to otherwise perform affirmative conduct.
  trigger: ", and shall not" force=shall_not
  side1 (no force-word found): (10) "Crime-related prohibition" means an order of a court prohibiting conduct that directly relates to the circumstances of the crime for which the offender has been convicted
  side2: be construed to mean orders directing an offender affirmatively to participate in rehabilitative programs or to otherwise perform affirmative conduct.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 23 — bill 2112, section section_5 ---
sentence: (1) This chapter does not apply to a bona fide news or public interest broadcast, website video, report, or event and may not be construed to affect the rights of a news-gathering organization.
  trigger: "and may not" force=may_not
  side1 (no force-word found): (1) This chapter does not apply to a bona fide news or public interest broadcast, website video, report, or event
  side2: be construed to affect the rights of a news-gathering organization.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 24 — bill 5074, section section_1 ---
sentence: (12) "Fixed or established place of business" for the purpose of this chapter means any permanent warehouse, building, or structure, at which necessary and appropriate equipment and fixtures are maintained for properly handling those agricultural products generally dealt in, and at which supplies of the agricultural products being usually transported are stored, offered for sale, sold, delivered, and generally dealt with in quantities reasonably adequate for and usually carried for the requirements of such a business, and that is recognized as a permanent business at such place, and carried on as such in good faith and not for the purpose of evading this chapter, and where specifically designated personnel are available to handle transactions concerning those agricultural products generally dealt in, which personnel are available during designated and appropriate hours to that business, and shall not mean a residence, barn, garage, tent, temporary stand or other temporary quarters, any railway car, or permanent quarters occupied pursuant to any temporary arrangement.
  trigger: ", and shall not" force=shall_not
  side1 (no force-word found): (12) "Fixed or established place of business" for the purpose of this chapter means any permanent warehouse, building, or structure, at which necessary and appropriate equipment and fixtures are maintained for properly handling those agricultural products generally dealt in, and at which supplies of the agricultural products being usually transported are stored, offered for sale, sold, delivered, and generally dealt with in quantities reasonably adequate for and usually carried for the requirements of such a business, and that is recognized as a permanent business at such place, and carried on as such in good faith and not for the purpose of evading this chapter, and where specifically designated personnel are available to handle transactions concerning those agricultural products generally dealt in, which personnel are available during designated and appropriate hours to that business
  side2: mean a residence, barn, garage, tent, temporary stand or other temporary quarters, any railway car, or permanent quarters occupied pursuant to any temporary arrangement.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 25 — bill 5085, section section_403 [appeared in 2 places: bill 5085 section_403, bill 5085 section_404] ---
sentence: (2) The value of the ratio obtained is the annual adjustment to the original retirement allowance and must be applied beginning with the July payment.
  trigger: "and must" force=must
  side1 (no force-word found): (2) The value of the ratio obtained is the annual adjustment to the original retirement allowance
  side2: be applied beginning with the July payment.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 26 — bill 5118, section section_1 ---
sentence: (f) A limited license issued under this subsection is valid for two years and may be renewed three times by the commission upon application for renewal by the nominating entity for a total of eight years .
  trigger: "and may" force=may
  side1 (no force-word found): (f) A limited license issued under this subsection is valid for two years
  side2: be renewed three times by the commission upon application for renewal by the nominating entity for a total of eight years .

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 27 — bill 5129, section section_20 ---
sentence: (10)(a) A unit owners association that willfully violates this section is liable to the unit owner for actual damages, and shall pay a civil penalty to the unit owner in an amount not to exceed $1,000.
  trigger: ", and shall" force=shall
  side1 (no force-word found): (10)(a) A unit owners association that willfully violates this section is liable to the unit owner for actual damages
  side2: pay a civil penalty to the unit owner in an amount not to exceed $1,000.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 28 — bill 5129, section section_24 ---
sentence: (8)(a) A unit owners association that willfully violates this section is liable to the unit owner for actual damages, and shall pay a civil penalty to the unit owner in an amount not to exceed $1,000.
  trigger: ", and shall" force=shall
  side1 (no force-word found): (8)(a) A unit owners association that willfully violates this section is liable to the unit owner for actual damages
  side2: pay a civil penalty to the unit owner in an amount not to exceed $1,000.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 29 — bill 5129, section section_26 ---
sentence: Any other payments you make to the seller of a unit are at risk and may be lost if the seller defaults." (g) "CONSTRUCTION DEFECT CLAIMS.
  trigger: "and may" force=may
  side1 (no force-word found): Any other payments you make to the seller of a unit are at risk
  side2: be lost if the seller defaults." (g) "CONSTRUCTION DEFECT CLAIMS.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 30 — bill 5229, section section_1 [appeared in 4 places: bill 5229 section_1, bill 5229 section_2, bill 5765 section_1, bill 5765 section_2] ---
sentence: (44) "Professional person" means a mental health professional, substance use disorder professional, or designated crisis responder and shall also mean a physician, physician assistant, psychiatric advanced registered nurse practitioner, registered nurse, and such others as may be defined by rules adopted by the secretary pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;
  trigger: "and shall" force=shall
  side1 (no force-word found): (44) "Professional person" means a mental health professional, substance use disorder professional, or designated crisis responder
  side2: also mean a physician, physician assistant, psychiatric advanced registered nurse practitioner, registered nurse, and such others as may be defined by rules adopted by the secretary pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 31 — bill 5284, section section_101 ---
sentence: (1) The legislature finds that, as of 2025: (a) Washington's statewide waste recovery rate has been generally static since 2011 and Washington is not meeting the statewide goal of 50 percent recycling established in 1989; and (b) Many residents, particularly those who live in rural areas and in multifamily residences, do not have access to convenient or affordable curbside recycling, and must rely on taking recyclables to drop box locations, and that extended producer responsibility programs could make curbside recycling available and affordable for most people in the state.
  trigger: ", and must" force=must
  side1 (no force-word found): (1) The legislature finds that, as of 2025: (a) Washington's statewide waste recovery rate has been generally static since 2011 and Washington is not meeting the statewide goal of 50 percent recycling established in 1989; and (b) Many residents, particularly those who live in rural areas and in multifamily residences, do not have access to convenient or affordable curbside recycling
  side2: rely on taking recyclables to drop box locations, and that extended producer responsibility programs could make curbside recycling available and affordable for most people in the state.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 32 — bill 5296, section section_4 ---
sentence: (3) Excluding the offenses listed in RCW 13.40.160 (1)(b), the juvenile court maintains concurrent jurisdiction over a juvenile who is committed to the department and shall schedule review hearings every six months that the juvenile is in the custody of a juvenile rehabilitation facility to assess the youth's progress.
  trigger: "and shall" force=shall
  side1 (no force-word found): (3) Excluding the offenses listed in RCW 13.40.160 (1)(b), the juvenile court maintains concurrent jurisdiction over a juvenile who is committed to the department
  side2: schedule review hearings every six months that the juvenile is in the custody of a juvenile rehabilitation facility to assess the youth's progress.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 33 — bill 5296, section section_8 ---
sentence: Information regarding victims, next of kin, or witnesses requesting the notice, information regarding any other person specified in writing by the prosecuting attorney to receive the notice, and the notice are confidential and shall not be available to the juvenile.
  trigger: "and shall not" force=shall_not
  side1 (no force-word found): Information regarding victims, next of kin, or witnesses requesting the notice, information regarding any other person specified in writing by the prosecuting attorney to receive the notice, and the notice are confidential
  side2: be available to the juvenile.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 34 — bill 5352, section section_7 ---
sentence: (3) Household income information received by the office of the superintendent of public instruction, school employees, school district employees, or their designees in accordance with this section is exempt from disclosure under chapter 42.56 RCW and may not be disseminated except as provided by law.
  trigger: "and may not" force=may_not
  side1 (no force-word found): (3) Household income information received by the office of the superintendent of public instruction, school employees, school district employees, or their designees in accordance with this section is exempt from disclosure under chapter 42.56 RCW
  side2: be disseminated except as provided by law.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 35 — bill 5352, section section_9 ---
sentence: (4) The bonuses provided under this section are in addition to compensation received under a district's salary schedule adopted in accordance with RCW 28A.405.200 and shall not be included in calculations of a district's average salary and associated salary limitations under RCW 28A.400.200 .
  trigger: "and shall not" force=shall_not
  side1 (no force-word found): (4) The bonuses provided under this section are in addition to compensation received under a district's salary schedule adopted in accordance with RCW 28A.405.200
  side2: be included in calculations of a district's average salary and associated salary limitations under RCW 28A.400.200 .

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 36 — bill 5374, section section_3 [appeared in 2 places: bill 5374 section_3, bill 5374 section_4] ---
sentence: (6)(a) Documents prepared by or for the council are inadmissible and may not be used in a civil or administrative proceeding, except that any document that exists before its use or consideration in a review by the council, or that is created independently of such review, does not become inadmissible merely because it is reviewed or used by the council.
  trigger: "and may not" force=may_not
  side1 (no force-word found): (6)(a) Documents prepared by or for the council are inadmissible
  side2: be used in a civil or administrative proceeding, except that any document that exists before its use or consideration in a review by the council, or that is created independently of such review, does not become inadmissible merely because it is reviewed or used by the council.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 37 — bill 5674, section section_2 ---
sentence: Once filed, the exemption is valid for six years or eight years and may not be renewed.
  trigger: "and may not" force=may_not
  side1 (no force-word found): Once filed, the exemption is valid for six years or eight years
  side2: be renewed.

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 38 — bill 5685, section section_2 ---
sentence: (b) A conviction vacated on or after July 28, 2019, qualifies as a prior conviction for the purpose of charging a present recidivist offense occurring on or after July 28, 2019, and may be used to establish an ongoing pattern of abuse for purposes of RCW 9.94A.535 . --- END ---
  trigger: ", and may" force=may
  side1 (no force-word found): (b) A conviction vacated on or after July 28, 2019, qualifies as a prior conviction for the purpose of charging a present recidivist offense occurring on or after July 28, 2019
  side2: be used to establish an ongoing pattern of abuse for purposes of RCW 9.94A.535 . --- END ---

--- FIRSTSIDE-SUPPRESSED 39 — bill 5732, section section_3 ---
sentence: The following goals are not listed in order of priority and shall be used exclusively for the purpose of guiding the development of comprehensive plans, development regulations, and, where specified, regional plans, policies, and strategies: (1) Urban growth.
  trigger: "and shall" force=shall
  side1 (no force-word found): The following goals are not listed in order of priority
  side2: be used exclusively for the purpose of guiding the development of comprehensive plans, development regulations, and, where specified, regional plans, policies, and strategies: (1) Urban growth.


=== OVER-BLOCKING OBSERVATION (raw pattern, not a proposed fix) ===
In sentences with two or more chained triggers, at least 3 cases (bill 1400/section_7, bill 1818/section_9, bill 1946/section_1,2,3,4) show the first trigger splitting correctly, but the second trigger in the same sentence getting suppressed by FIRST_SIDE_NOT_A_DUTY -- because its side-1 text is actually the inherited duty-2 text from the first split, which doesn't literally contain the word shall/must/may (the force was inherited via pendingForce, not restated in the text). Example: "...shall have the power to and may in its discretion commission railroad police officers... and may revoke any commission at its pleasure." -- the first split is fine, but the second trigger's side-1 text is just "in its discretion commission railroad police officers at the request of any railroad corporation" (no literal force-word), so it is suppressed even though it is arguably a legitimate continuation of an already-established duty chain. Round 1 had produced 2 splits on this sentence; round 2 produces only 1.
